Add Dark-theme-handbook (#3610)
patternfly/patternfly-org: packages/documentation-site/patternfly-docs/content/developer-resources/dark-theme-handbook.md

---
id: Dark theme handbook
title: PatternFly dark theme handbook
section: developer-resources
---

## Enabling dark theme

Dark theme styles ship with PatternFly CSS by default. To enable dark theme, add the class  `pf-v5-theme-dark`  to the `<html>` tag of your application. This class can be added dynamically to toggle dark theme on and off in your application.

Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use Javascript(JS) to detect the media query and apply the `pf-theme-dark` class via the JS code. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to turn dark theme on or off based on user preference. Adam Argyle wrote [a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JS to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 

## What’s changed?
The following are some notable changes and differences between light and dark themes. 

> | Color palette changes | Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|

Reviewer: This table looks a little odd with so much white space for the empty columns. I wonder if it would be too repetitive to have something like

#### Black color palette
Black color palette updated and a new lighter gray was added

| Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|
| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-50  | #e0e0e0 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-100 | #c6c7c8 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-200 | #aaabac |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-300 | #868789 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-400 | #57585a |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-500 | #444548 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-600 | #36373a |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-700 | #26292d |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-800 | #1b1d21 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-850 | #212427 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-900 | #0f1214 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-1000| #030303 |

#### Red color palette
Two new red colors added 

| Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|
| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--red-9999  | #fe5142 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--red-8888  | #ff7468 |

#### Blue color palette
`blue-300` was updated to support an additional variation of primary blue'

| Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|
| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--blue-300 | #1fa7f8 |

Author: I do like that better

| ---------------| -------------------- | -------------------- |
|Black color palette updated and a new lighter gray was added| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-50  | #e0e0e0 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-100 | #c6c7c8 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-200 | #aaabac |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-300 | #868789 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-400 | #57585a |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-500 | #444548 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-600 | #36373a |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-700 | #26292d |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-800 | #1b1d21 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-850 | #212427 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-900 | #0f1214 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--black-1000| #030303 |
|New red colors added       | --pf-v5-global--palette--red-9999  | #fe5142 |
|                           | --pf-v5-global--palette--red-8888  | #ff7468 |

> |New primary blue added     | --pf-v5-global--palette--blue-300 | #1fa7f8 |

Reviewer: I'm not sure if "new primary blue added" is the right wording since this just updates the value of `blue-300`. For reference, the black color description in this table refers to the var being "updated" if the var changed, and "added" in the case of `black-50`.

**Global variables added**

`--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--300` added as background color for elements that appear on top of others. Examples include popovers and dropdown menus.

> `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--400` added as background color for hover/interaction state of items placed on top of other dark background. Examples include hover/focus backgrounds for items in a dropdown menu or popover and control elements like text inputs, textareas, menu toggles.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what a good description is for this color, but looking at the code, the majority of uses are

control elements
* the button "control" variation
* menu toggle (includes select, dropdown, etc)
* anything that presents as a "form control" - like text inputs and text areas

hover/interaction state of an item places on top of `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--300` - the floating background listed above.

wdyt @mceledonia 

```suggestion
`--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--400` added as background color for hover/interaction state of items placed on top of other dark background. Examples include hover/focus backgrounds for items in a dropdown menu or popover and control elements like text inputs, textareas, menu toggles.
```

Here is a link to [all global var overrides](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss) for dark theme for your reference. 

## Best practices

The following are some best practices for designing and implementing applications to make it easier to support light and dark theming. We recommend that you keep these considerations in mind for any new development.

* Using PatternFly components without customizations will make it easier to implement dark theme in your application. Most of the problems encountered have been around the use of custom styles, overrides to PatternFly styles, and non-PatternFly components. Whenever possible, to ensure consistent styling and behavior when switching themes, try and use PatternFly components as they are.

* When making overrides, utilize the global and component CSS variable system to define the override. For example, to override a primary button’s background color, declare `.pf-v5-c-button { --pf-v5-c-button--m-primary--BackgroundColor: [color]; }` instead of `.pf-v5-c-button.pf-m-primary { background-color: [color]; }`.

> * When creating overrides and custom styles, try to utilize the CSS variable system for the style values. For example, use background-color: `var(--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--100)` for a primary background instead of `background-color: #fff` or `background-color: white`. Colors like `#fff` and `white` will not change between light and dark theme, but the use of `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--100` will. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When creating overrides and custom styles, try to utilize the CSS variable system for the style values. For example, use `background-color: var(--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--100)` for a primary background instead of `background-color: #fff` or `background-color: white`. Colors like `#fff` and `white` will not change between light and dark theme, but the use of `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--100` will. 
```

> * Try to use the most “meaningful” variable whenever possible. For example, in PatternFly, `--pf-v5-global--Link--Color`, `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--100` and  `--pf-v5-global--palette--blue-400` are all the same. When creating something custom where the color should match the application’s link text color, any of these values will work in the default light theme. However, in a different theme, `--pf-v5-global--Link--Color` and `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--100` may not always match. Or `--pf-v5-global--palette--blue-400` may not be the same color used to represent a link.

Reviewer: oxford comma ftw!

```suggestion
* Try to use the most “meaningful” variable whenever possible. For example, in PatternFly, `--pf-v5-global--Link--Color`, `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--100`, and  `--pf-v5-global--palette--blue-400` are all the same. When creating something custom where the color should match the application’s link text color, any of these values will work in the default light theme. However, in a different theme, `--pf-v5-global--Link--Color` and `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--100` may not always match. Or `--pf-v5-global--palette--blue-400` may not be the same color used to represent a link.
```

---
id: Dark theme handbook
title: PatternFly dark theme handbook
section: developer-resources
---

## Enabling dark theme

> Dark theme styles ship with PatternFly CSS by default. To enable dark theme, add the class  `pf-v5-theme-dark`  to the `<html>` tag of your application. This class can be added dynamically to toggle dark theme on and off in your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dark theme styles ship with PatternFly CSS by default. To enable dark theme, add the class `pf-v5-theme-dark` to your application's `<html>` tag. This class can be added dynamically to toggle dark theme on and off in your application.
```

> Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use Javascript(JS) to detect the media query and apply the `pf-theme-dark` class via the JS code. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to turn dark theme on or off based on user preference. Adam Argyle wrote [a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JS to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use Javascript (JS) to detect the media query and apply the `pf-theme-dark` class via the JS code. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to toggle dark theme based on user preference. [Adam Argyle wrote a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JS to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 
```

## What’s changed?

> The following are some notable changes and differences between light and dark themes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are some notable changes and differences between light and dark themes, outlined in this section. 

To view a list of all dark theme CSS overrides [view our override file on GitHub.](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss). 
```

Moving this link up from the bottom. Let me know if my rewording is inaccurate

**Black color palette**

> Black color palette updated and a new lighter gray was added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our black color palette was updated and a new, lighter gray was added.
```

> | Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Variables affected | New or updated color values|
```
nit - if these tables are final can we just use "variable" or "variables" as appropriate?

| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-50  | #e0e0e0 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-100 | #c6c7c8 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-200 | #aaabac |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-300 | #868789 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-400 | #57585a |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-500 | #444548 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-600 | #36373a |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-700 | #26292d |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-800 | #1b1d21 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-850 | #212427 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-900 | #0f1214 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-1000| #030303 |

> **Red color palette**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Red color palette**

```

> Two new red colors added.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two new colors were added to our red color palette.
```

> | Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Variables affected | New or updated color values|
```

| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--red-9999  | #fe5142 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--red-8888  | #ff7468 |

**Blue color palette**

> blue-300 was updated to support an additional variation of primary blue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`blue-300` was updated to support an additional variation of primary blue.
```

> | Variable(s) affected | New or updated color values|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Variable affected | New or updated color values|
```

| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--blue-300 | #1fa7f8 |

> **Global variables added**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Global variables**
```
I would either use "added" or "updated" in all headings, or in none.

> `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--300` added as background color for elements that appear on top of others. Examples include popovers and dropdown menus.
> 
> `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--400` added as background color for hover/interaction state of items placed on top of other dark background. Examples include hover/focus backgrounds for items in a dropdown menu or popover and control elements like text inputs, textareas, menu toggles.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--300` was added as background color for elements that appear on top of other, such as popovers and dropdown menus.

`--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--400` was added as a background color for hover and interaction states of items that are placed on top of a dark background, such as dropdown menu items, text inputs, text areas, and menu toggles.
```
Does this rewording still sound accurate?

> `--pf-v5-global--BorderColor--400` added as a bottom border color used for control elements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`--pf-v5-global--BorderColor--400` was added as a bottom border color for control elements.
```

**Status colors added**

> `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--300` added as a new primary background color that meets contrast requirements for elements that will have text on top, including primary buttons and unread badges.
> 
> Here is a link to [all global var overrides](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss) for dark theme for your reference. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`--pf-v5-global--primary-color--300` was added as a new primary background color to meet contrast requirements for elements that have text on top, such as primary buttons and unread badges.
```
moving link to the top

---
id: Dark theme handbook
title: PatternFly dark theme handbook
section: developer-resources
---

## Enabling dark theme

Dark theme styles ship with PatternFly CSS by default. To enable dark theme, add the class `pf-v5-theme-dark` to your application's `<html>` tag. This class can be added dynamically to toggle dark theme on and off in your application.

> Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use JavaScript to detect the media query and apply the `pf-theme-dark` class. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to toggle dark theme based on user preference. [Adam Argyle wrote a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JavaScript to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use JavaScript to detect the media query and apply the `pf-v5-theme-dark` class. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to toggle dark theme based on user preference. [Adam Argyle wrote a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JavaScript to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 
```

> Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use Javascript (JS) to detect the media query and apply the `pf-theme-dark` class via the JS code. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to toggle dark theme based on user preference. [Adam Argyle wrote a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JS to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dark theme can also be applied based on the browser’s `prefers-color-scheme` media query. The recommended way to apply dark theme based on this media query is to use JavaScript to detect the media query and apply the `pf-theme-dark` class. This allows a product to simply manipulate a single class to toggle dark theme based on user preference. [Adam Argyle wrote a great article](https://web.dev/building-a-theme-switch-component/#javascript) on using JavaScript to manage dark theme preference, using the `prefers-color-scheme` media query alongside a manual button to toggle dark theme on or off. 
```

## What’s changed?
There are some notable changes and differences between light and dark themes, outlined in this section. 

> To view a list of all dark theme CSS overrides [view our override file on GitHub](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss). 

Reviewer: > To view a list of all dark theme CSS overrides

There is no mention here that this file is just overrides for global variables. It reads like it might cover every dark theme override (including components and any other kinds of overrides). This also doesn't include the color overrides, which are in https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/colors.scss

Do we need to link to anything? If so, we should probably be more specific in the wording and/or what we're linking to.

Author: @mcoker I'll turn this back to you. What do you think it's important to list here or do we need this link at all? Yes, I can change this to just reference global variables. But is that useful by itself? I don't know.

Reviewer: @mcarrano IMO there is a disconnect between this verbiage and the link/table data. The way it reads seems to me that it 

```
What’s changed?
There are some notable changes and differences between light and dark themes, outlined in this section.

To view a list of all dark theme CSS overrides [view our override file on GitHub](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss).
```

I'd say we have 2 paths we can go here:
* Short and sweet. Just update the verbiage a bit, and leave everything else. This leaves any details about component specific overrides a bit vague, but I think that's OK because a short version of component overrides may be difficult.
    ```
    Dark theme contains a number of additions and overrides to our color palettes, global variables, and component specific CSS. Outlined below are the main changes to our colors and global variables - to view the full source of these changes, see the [dark theme color overrides](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/colors.scss) and [dark theme global variable overrides](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss) on GitHub.
    ```
* Create sub-sections for colors, global vars, and component overrides. Something like:
    ```
    Dark theme contains a number of additions and overrides to our color palettes, global variables, and component specific CSS. 
    
    ### Color palettes
    We made a bunch of changes to the palettes, see all of the changes in [color palette overrides](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/colors.scss)
    // ... the stuff we already have and we can link to the color 
    
    ### Global variables
    We made a bunch of changes to the global vars, see all of the changes in [dark theme global variable overrides](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/sass-utilities/themes/dark/scss-variables.scss)

    ### Component style overrides
    In some cases, there are dark theme style overrides needed for specific components. To see the changes per component, you can find them alongside the components stylesheet in a folder with the structure `themes/dark/[component].scss`. For example, the button component's dark theme overrides are in [components/Button/themes/dark/button.scss](https://github.com/patternfly/patternfly/blob/main/src/patternfly/components/Button/themes/dark/button.scss)
    ``` 
    

If you don't see any issues with that second approach splitting things into sub-sections, I'd probably go that route. WDYT?

Author: I like the short version. I agree that the more we try to explain, the more confusing this feels.

| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-50  | #e0e0e0 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-100 | #c6c7c8 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-200 | #aaabac |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-300 | #868789 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-400 | #57585a |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-500 | #444548 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-600 | #36373a |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-700 | #26292d |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-800 | #1b1d21 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-850 | #212427 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-900 | #0f1214 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--black-1000| #030303 |

**Red color palette**

Two new colors were added to our red color palette.

| Variables affected | New or updated color values|
| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--red-9999  | #fe5142 |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--red-8888  | #ff7468 |

**Blue color palette**

`blue-300` was updated to support an additional variation of primary blue.

| Variable affected | New or updated color values|
| -------------------- | -------------------- |
| --pf-v5-global--palette--blue-300 | #1fa7f8 |

**Global variables**

> `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--300` was added as background color for elements that appear on top of other, such as popovers and dropdown menus.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--300` was added as background color for elements that appear on top of others, such as popovers and dropdown menus.
```

`--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--400` was added as a background color for hover and interaction states of items that are placed on top of a dark background, such as dropdown menu items, text inputs, text areas, and menu toggles.

`--pf-v5-global--BorderColor--400` was added as a bottom border color for control elements.

**Status colors**

`--pf-v5-global--primary-color--300` was added as a new primary background color to meet contrast requirements for elements that have text on top, such as primary buttons and unread badges.

## Best practices

To make it easier to support light and dark theming in your application, we recommend considering these best practices during design and development:

> * Using PatternFly components without customizations will make it easier to implement dark theme in your application. Most of the problems encountered have been around the use of custom styles, overrides to PatternFly styles, and non-PatternFly components. To ensure consistent styling and behavior when switching themes, try and use PatternFly components as they are.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Using PatternFly components without customizations will make it easier to implement dark theme in your application. Most of the problems encountered have been around the use of custom styles, overrides to PatternFly styles, and non-PatternFly components. To ensure consistent styling and behavior when switching themes, try to use PatternFly components as they are.
```

* When creating overrides and custom styles, try to utilize the CSS variable system for the style values. For example, use `background-color: var(--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--100)` for a primary background instead of `background-color: #fff` or `background-color: white`. Colors like `#fff` and `white` will not change between light and dark theme, but the use of `--pf-v5-global--BackgroundColor--100` will. 

* Try to use the most “meaningful” variable whenever possible. For example, in PatternFly, `--pf-v5-global--Link--Color`, `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--100`, and  `--pf-v5-global--palette--blue-400` are all the same. When creating something custom where the color should match the application’s link text color, any of these values will work in the default light theme. However, in a different theme, `--pf-v5-global--Link--Color` and `--pf-v5-global--primary-color--100` may not always match. Or `--pf-v5-global--palette--blue-400` may not be the same color used to represent a link.

> * As much as possible, use SVG files or icon fonts for icons, and use global variables for icon colors. To easily manipulate icon colors between. light and dark theme, SVG files and icon fonts can be changed via CSS by using the fill and color properties. When using variables like `--pf-v5-global--info-color--100` or `--pf-v5-global--success-color--100`, these colors will adapt automatically between light and dark theme. If images must be used, we advise you to use colors that work well in both light and dark themes, or hide and show the appropriate images based on the presence of the dark theme body class.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* As much as possible, use SVG files or icon fonts for icons, and use global variables for icon colors. To easily manipulate icon colors between light and dark theme, SVG files and icon fonts can be changed via CSS by using the fill and color properties. When using variables like `--pf-v5-global--info-color--100` or `--pf-v5-global--success-color--100`, colors will adapt automatically between light and dark theme. If images must be used, we advise you to use colors that work well in both light and dark themes, or hide and show the appropriate images based on the presence of the dark theme body class.
```
